---
layout: post
title: Bus Ride Reviews — On Web Typography
teaser: A brief review of Jason Santa Maria's new book. While it’s pretty basic stuff for an experienced designer, it's a quick read with a lot of useful information on the state of the state of web typography.
assets: "9-14-web-type"
category: blog
tags : [typography, books, bus-ride-reads]
---
{% assign photo="web-type" %}
{% assign caption =""; %}
{% assign url = "http://www.abookapart.com/products/on-web-typography"; %}
{% include custom/pic_pull %}

I just read this book and wanted to get down some thoughts before I forget them. It’s a decent book that reviews general typographic principles in an accessible way. While it’s pretty basic stuff for an experienced designer, there were some things I’d forgotten, some I never knew, and I’ll probably refer back to it from time to time. 

If your goal is to learn about web fonts from a developer's perspective, this probably isn't a good choice because it's so general and — being in print — can't really compete with rapid changes for which researching online will be a better bet. For instance, he talks about icon fonts which are already becoming out-moded. 

However, if you're a designer who just wants the basics — where to find web fonts, how to test them, and how to get them to display across browsers — this is a good place to start. 

{% assign photo="freefonts" %}
{% assign caption ="Screen grab from the free faces website"; %}
{% assign url = "http://freefaces.simonfosterdesign.com/"; %}
{% include custom/pic_push %}

Santa Maria doesn't think too much of free fonts, which seems like fair advice in general, but there are exceptions. In the resources section, he sites [Beautiful Web Type](http://hellohappy.org/beautiful-web-type/), a decent list of nice, free fonts, but one that hasn't been updated in over a year. For a more up-to-date discussion, check out [Taking a second look at free fonts](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2014/03/12/taking-a-second-look-at-free-fonts/), by Jeremiah Shoaf. Also, a [nice collection of free fonts](http://freefaces.simonfosterdesign.com/) that aren't necessarily web optimized. 

I liked his simple and approachable way of assessing a typeface so that you can decide whether it works well for your purposes. Although he briefly covers a larger range of considerations, he doesn’t delve much into things like counters, terminals, ascenders/descenders, and all the other aspects of letter anatomy. Instead, he talks about 3 key points for making sense of a typeface:

<strong>Contrast</strong>: Are the stroke-weights relatively even, like with Helvetica — or varied, like with Bodoni?

<strong>x-height</strong>: Again, is it high like Helvetica or low like Bodoni?

<strong>Letterforms</strong>: Basically, are the letterforms distinct from one another? Do they have a lot of character or little to no character?

There's a lot more to assessing a typeface that these three characteristics, but I like it as a starting place.

Although he doesn’t get too into the technical aspects of how computers render letterforms, he mentions how Mac OS uses Core Text and Microsoft uses DirectWrite, and shows some of their quirks. Not much to do about it except to understand the basic unpredictability of how text is rendered on screen.

For things web designers do have control over, I tended to agree with his take.

* FOUT (the flash of unstyled text). Sometimes thought of a bug, sometimes as a feature, Santa Maria sees it as more of a feature. I tend to agree. Better to get content to users faster even if it means the font might change after you start reading. Look to make the transition from one font to another as undramatic as possible. Specifically, if you set body copy to 18px with a web font, make sure that the backup font doesn't appear too big or small at 18px — you might need a different size for the backup, something that's possible with [web font loader](https://developers.google.com/fonts/docs/webfont_loader). In addition to font size, consider line height, color, and other characteristics as well.

* Baseline grids. Great in print because type can be seen through the paper. Nice that it creates a rhythm but exceptionally hard to pull of on web and probably not worth it when dealing with a CMS — where it’s so easy for assets like images to throw off the rhythm.

* Consider using a system font for body text, since it will load super quickly and readability is greatly infuenced by familiarity. Although... The book doesn't say it, but [there’s no such thing as web-safe font anymore](http://westleyknight.co.uk/farewell-web-safe-fonts/).

* It’s possible to justify type with css but it isn’t usually worth doing because automatic hyphenation is poor and it can create awkward rivers.

That’s all. Check out [the book](http://www.abookapart.com/products/on-web-typography) here!