---
layout: portfolio
title: Composer Music Tracking Application
teaser: I implemented several features in this application, which handles music playlists for public radio stations.
micro-teaser: Front end design
category : portfolio
assets: composer
hero: hero
hero-caption: Composer, an app for tracking music on radio programs.
tags : [front-end, css, backbone, javascript]
---

Composer is an application that radio stations use to create and manage playlists — both to help stations meet legal requirements regarding the songs they play and to serve listeners, by displaying song, artist, and other information. 

I implemented several features to the admin side of this application, including a typeahead search capability; a new interface for classical music stations; and a way to navigate through calendar views. 

Composer is built with backbone.js, so the work I did was primarily in backbone views, collections, and underscore templates — as well as css. 

###Classical Search

Classical music programming demands a different way to search for songs than what works for popular music. Songs are often selected or organized based on composer, like Mozart, rather than artist; the conductor's name is significant; and data about the ensemble and soloists are often used to find a particular piece. Working in backbone, I created a new view and template for the classical search interface.

{% assign photo="classical-search" %}
{% assign caption="The search interface for classical music programs" %}
{% include custom/pic_normal %}

###Custom Fields

I implemented a form with the option of adding up to three custom rows for data about a given song, and validation in the event a user tries to add more. 

{% assign photo="edit-fields" %}
{% assign caption="The search interface for classical music programs" %}
{% include custom/pic_large %}

###Calendar Navigation

Navigating the calendar view had been possible, but it required going one week at a time by clicking the little arrow icons beside the date. I added a way for administrators to navigate month-by-month and jump to a particular week, indicating with a highlighted row that they'd be going to a week and not a single day.

{% assign photo="calendar" %}
{% assign caption="A station administrator can jump to a given week by navigating the calendar month by month." %}
{% include custom/pic_normal filetype="gif" %}